In this video we will discuss how to search a
node in a linked list
So we have a singly linked list with four
nodes with values 10 2030 and 40
So this is the code to implement a search operation
The function search will be doing the search operation and
it returns the result of search
So it takes in the key to be searched And
if the keys found than the function returns true and
if the keys not found than it returns false so
write the function public Boolean search of int key
So what we are going to do is we will
traverse the entire linked list compare each nodes data with
key and if it is matched then returned true else
Return false
So let us create temp pointing to head so that
we can start iterating from the beginning of the
list So write node temp equal to head
So TEMP based pointing the head now Now we need
while loop traverse the list and checked the data
at each node So write the while loop while temp
not equal to null
Now for each node we need to compare its data
with the key if it is matched then returned true
else move to the next node
So write if TEMP data equal to key return true
otherwise just move to next node So write temp equal
to temp next
Now if all the nodes are checked and we reached
the end then this while loop will terminate So finally we
can return false as the key was not found so
write return false after the while loop let us see an
example here that a search for the element 30 so key
equal to 30 here First we check If temp which
is pointing to head is null if it is null
it means we have reached the end of the linked
list and it will not enter the while
loop here temp equal to 1024 which is not equal
to null so ender the loop now check If the data
at addressed 1024 is the key so compared 10 with
But it is not the same
So if fails jump to the next statment we have temp
equal to temp next so temp now points to the second
node again The while condition is check and temp equal
to 2024 which is not equal to null
So the condition is true
So enter the while loop now compare 20 with 30
but it's not the same
So if fails again so it jumps to the next
statement and temp will now point to the next node
at 3024 again check If temp has become null and
it has not so enter the while loop and check
If data at 3024 is equal to the key so
we compared data 30 and the key 30 both are
the same
So if returns true so it will return true which
means key is found
So this is how it works
let us see Another case were the search key is not
found So let the key to be searched Be 100 1st
the head address which is 1024 is stored
to temp and we have while condition temp not equal
to null
And here temp is equal 2024 which is not
equal to null
So the condition is true
So enter the while loop now check
If the data at address 1024 is the key so
compared 10 with 100
But the comparison returns falls so if conditioned fails so
the control jumps to the next statement
Temp equal to temp next so temp will now point to
the second node again we have temp equal to 2024
which is not equal to null
So the while condition is true
So it will enter the loop and check if the
second node is holding the key 100
But the comparison returns a false and if condition has
failed so temp will now point to the next node
at 3024 again checked The while condition 3024 is not
equal to null So enter the loop and compared the
data at 3024 the key
But we have 30 and the key is 100 which are
not the same
So if condition fails again so jump to the next
statement Temp equal to temp next so temp will now point
to the fourth node at 4024 and again check
the while condition
And it is true so check
If the data at this node is equal to the
key and it is not so we need to move
temp to next node and temp next is equal to
null here which will be stored in temp
now again in next iteration
When the while condition is checked it fails
Since temp is equal to null so it will return
false which means the key is not found
So that's it
Now let us talk about the time complexity the
best cases when the search key is present in the
first node itself
So while loop need to execute only one so the
best case time complexity will be order of one
The worst cases when the search key is present in
the last node
So the while loop will have n iterations if we
have n nodes so the worst case time complexity will be
order of n.